PEP 788: Reimagining native threads (#4385)
python/peps: peps/pep-0788.rst

PEP: 788
Title: Reimagining native threads
Author: Peter Bierma <zintensitydev@gmail.com>

> Sponsor: Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>

Reviewer: cc @vstinner for confirmation

Reviewer 2: Yes, I'm discussing with Peter, I agreed to sponsor the PEP.

Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 23-Apr-2025
Python-Version: 3.15

> Post-History: `10-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/a-new-api-for-ensuring-releasing-thread-states/83959>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Post-History: `10-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959>`__
```

Abstract
========

:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`, and other related

> functions in the ``PyGILState`` family, are the most common way to create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions in the ``PyGILState`` family are the most common way to create
```

> native threads that interact with Python, and have been the standard for over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
native threads that interact with Python. They have been the standard for over
```

> twenty years (:pep:`311`). But, as Python has grown, these functions have

Reviewer: "as Python has grown" is vague. Perhaps just "over time, problems have become apparent:"?

become problematic:

> - They aren't safe for finalization, either hanging the calling thread or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- They aren't safe for finalization, either causing the calling thread to hang or
```

  crashing it with a segmentation fault, preventing further execution.
- When they're called before finalization, they force the thread to be

>   "daemon," meaning that the interpreter won't wait for it to reach any point

Reviewer: Is the comma before the quotation mark intentional?

Author: Yes, but I overuse commas all the time. Is it wrong here?

Reviewer: Unless `daemon,` is a term of art (I don't know enough here to be sure), the comma should come after the closing quotation mark. 

An abundance of commas can indicate that the sentence should be split into shorter parts. This is more subjective. Variety is key!

Reviewer 3: FYI this is a difference between American and British punctuation styles; see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quotation_marks_in_English#Order_of_punctuation . But I think the "British" style is preferred in technical usage in American English too as it is more precise.

Author: Ah, yeah. I'm happy to yield from my silly American ways.

Reviewer: I didn't realise there was a different style on across the pond!

  of execution. This is mostly frustrating for developers, but can lead to
  deadlocks!
- Subinterpreters don't play nicely with them, because they all assume that
  the main interpreter is the only one that exists. A fresh thread (*i.e.*,
  has never had a thread state) that calls :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` will
  always be for the main interpreter.
- The term "GIL" in the name is quite confusing for users of free-threaded
  Python. There isn't a GIL, why do they still have to call it?

> This PEP intends to fix all of these issues by providing
> :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` and :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` as a more
> correct and safer replacement for :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` and
> :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP intends to fix all of these issues by providing two new functions,
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` and :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release`, as a more
correct and safer replacement for :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` and
:c:func:`PyGILState_Release`. For example:
```

> .. code-block:: C
> 
>         if (PyThreadState_Ensure(interp) < 0) {
>             fputs("Python is shutting down", stderr);
>             return;
>         }
> 
>         /* Interact with Python, without worrying about finalization. */
>         // ...
> 
>         PyThreadState_Release();

Reviewer: Remove excessive indentation
```suggestion
.. code-block:: C

    if (PyThreadState_Ensure(interp) < 0) {
        fputs("Python is shutting down", stderr);
        return;
    }

    /* Interact with Python, without worrying about finalization. */
    // ...

    PyThreadState_Release();
```

Motivation
==========

Native threads will always hang during finalization
---------------------------------------------------

Many codebases might need to call Python code in highly-asynchronous
situations where the interpreter is already finalizing, or might finalize, and want to continue
running code after the Python call. This desire has been

> `brought up by users <https://discuss.python.org/t/safely-using-the-c-api-when-python-might-shut-down/78850/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`brought up by users <https://discuss.python.org/t/78850/>`_.
```

> For example, a callback that wants to call Python code might be invoked by:
> 
> - A kernel has finished running on the GPU
> - A network packet was received.
> - A thread has quit, and the C++ library is executing static finalizers of
>   thread local storage.

Reviewer: Style: list items should follow on as continuations of the initial sentence. Also remove mention of C++, as IIUC this would also apply in e.g. Rust.

```suggestion
For example, a callback that wants to call Python code might be invoked when:

- A kernel has finished running on a GPU
- A network packet was received.
- A thread has quit, and the native library is executing static finalizers of
  thread local storage.
```

Author: It would apply to Rust, but this isn't an extensive list. Since these are supposed to be examples, I think it would be better to be specific here.

> In the current C API, any non-Python thread (*i.e.*, not created by
> :mod:`threading`) is considered to be "daemon," meaning that the interpreter

Reviewer: Query again on the comma placement.
```suggestion
In the current C API, any non-Python thread (one not created via the
:mod:`threading` module) is considered to be "daemon," meaning that the interpreter
```

won't wait on that thread to finalize. Instead, the interpreter will hang the

> thread when it goes to `attach <attached thread state>`_ a `thread state`_,

Reviewer: Use the [`:term:`](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/referencing.html#role-term) role to cross-reference? (throughout)

Author: I'm far from being a Sphinx wizard. Do I need to redefine the 3.14 attached thread state term somewhere in the PEP, or will it still go to the documentation?

Reviewer: It should automatically cross reference if you use the term role.

Author: Oh, I didn't realize it would pick up the 3.14 documentation.

making it unusable past that point. Attaching a thread state can happen at
any point when invoking Python, such as releasing the GIL in-between bytecode
instructions, or when a C function exits a :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`
block.

This means that any non-Python thread may be terminated at any point, which
is severely limiting for users who want to do more than just execute Python
code in their stream of calls (for example, C++ executing finalizers in
*addition* to calling Python).

``Py_IsFinalizing`` is insufficient
***********************************

> The `docs <https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/init.html#c.PyGILState_Ensure>`_

Reviewer: 'The docs currently recommend' feels a bit too vague. Perhaps "The best current solution to the finalisation problem is implementing checks using Py_IsFinalizing, as recommended in the C API documentation. Unfortunately..."

```suggestion
The :c:func:`docs <PyGILState_Ensure>`
```

currently recommend :c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing` to guard against termination of
the thread:

    Calling this function from a thread when the runtime is finalizing will
    terminate the thread, even if the thread was not created by Python. You
    can use Py_IsFinalizing() or sys.is_finalizing() to check if the
    interpreter is in process of being finalized before calling this function
    to avoid unwanted termination.

Unfortunately, this isn't correct, because of time-of-call to time-of-use
issues; the interpreter might not be finalizing during the call to
:c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing`, but it might start finalizing right after, which
would cause the attachment of a thread state (typically via
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`) to hang the thread.

Daemon threads can cause finalization deadlocks
***********************************************

When acquiring locks, it's extremely important to detach the thread state to

> prevent deadlocks. This is true on both the GIL-ful and free-threaded builds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prevent deadlocks. This is true on both the GIL and free-threaded builds.
```

Author: I'm not aware of the term "GIL build" being used before. How about "with-GIL build," using PEP 779 as precedent?

Reviewer: Sure.

> In a GIL-icious build, a deadlock can occur pretty easily when acquiring a

Reviewer: Whilst cute, GIL-icious is needlessly confusing.
```suggestion
In an interpreter built with the GIL, a deadlock can occur pretty easily when acquiring a
```

Author: I can use something other than GIL-icious (though it is my favorite term for it), "interpreter" is problematic, especially considering that this PEP has subinterpreters in mind. How about simply "when the GIL is enabled"

Reviewer: That sounds clearer, thank you.

So, all code that needs to work with locks need to detach the thread state.
In C, this is almost always done via :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS` and
:c:macro:`Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS`, in a code block that looks something like this:

.. code-block:: C

    Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS
    acquire_lock();
    Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS

Again, in a daemon thread, :c:macro:`Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS` will hang the thread
if the interpreter is finalizing. But, :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS` will
*not* hang the thread; the lock will be acquired, and *then* hung! Once that
happens, nothing can try to acquire that lock without deadlocking. The main
thread will continue to run finalizers past that point, though. If any of
those finalizers try to acquire the lock, deadlock ensues.

This affects the Python core itself, and there's not much that can be done
to fix it. For example, `gh-129536 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/129536>`_
remarks that the :mod:`ssl` module can emit a fatal error when used at
finalization, because a daemon thread got hung while holding the lock. There
are workarounds for this for pure-Python code, but native threads don't have
such an option.

> We can't change finalization behavior for ``PyGILState_Ensure``

Reviewer: You can use cross-reference roles in titles to keep consistent styling

***************************************************************

There will always have to be a point in a Python program where
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` can no longer acquire the GIL (or more correctly,
attach a thread state). If the interpreter is long dead, then Python
obviously can't give a thread a way to invoke it.
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` doesn't have any meaningful way to return a
failure, so it has no choice but to terminate the thread or emit a fatal

> error, as noted in `gh-124622 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124622>`_:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
error, as noted in `python/cpython#124622 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124622>`_:
```

---------------------------------------

There are currently two public ways for a user to create and attach their own
`thread state`_; manual use of :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` / :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap`,
and :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`. The former, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`,
is `significantly more common <https://grep.app/search?q=pygilstate_ensure>`_.

``PyGILState`` generally crashes during finalization
****************************************************

As of this PEP, the current behavior of :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` does not
match the documentation. Instead of hanging the thread during finalization
as previously noted, it's extremely common for it to crash with a segmentation
fault. This is a `known issue <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124619>`_
that could, in theory, be fixed in CPython, but it's definitely worth noting
here. Incidentally, acceptance and implementation of this PEP will likely fix
the existing crashes caused by :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

``PyGILState`` is tricky for free-threading
*******************************************

A large issue with the term "GIL" in the C API is that it's semantically

> misleading, as noted in `gh-127989 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/127989>`_
> (disclaimer: the author of this PEP also authored that issue):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
misleading, as noted in `python/cpython#127989
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/127989>`_,
created by the authors of this PEP:
```

    The biggest issue is that for free-threading, there is no GIL, so users
    erroneously call the C API inside ``Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`` blocks or
    omit ``PyGILState_Ensure`` in fresh threads.

In reality, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` doesn't just "acquire the GIL" in
modern versions. It attaches a `thread state`_ for the current

> thread--*that's* what lets a thread invoke the C API. On GIL-ful builds,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thread--*that's* what lets a thread invoke the C API. On interpreters built with the GIL,
```

Author: Ditto, "interpreter" is confusing here.

holding an `attached thread state`_ implies holding the GIL, so only one
thread can have one at a time. Free-threaded builds achieve the effect of
multi-core parallism while remaining backwards-compatible by simply removing
that limitation: threads still need a thread state (and thus need to call
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`), but they don't need to wait on one another to
do so.

Subinterpreters don't work with ``PyGILState``
----------------------------------------------

As noted in the

> `documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/init.html#non-python-created-threads>`_,

Reviewer: Use a `:ref:` role here

Author: I'm not too sure how. The `gilstate` anchor is apparently overwritten by PEP 554.

Reviewer: `` :ref:`python:gilstate` ``?

:c:func:`PyThreadState_New` / :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap`, is a lot better
for supporting subinterpreters (because :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` takes an
explicit interpreter, rather than assuming that the main interpreter was intended),
but is still limited by the current API.

In particular, subinterpreters typically have a much shorter lifetime than the
main interpreter, and as such, there's not necessarily a guarantee that a
:c:type:`PyInterpreterState` (acquired by :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Get`)
passed to a fresh thread will still be alive. Similarly, a
:c:type:`PyInterpreterState` pointer could have been replaced with a *new*
interpreter, causing all sorts of unknown issues. They are also subject to
all the finalization related hanging mentioned previously.

Rationale
=========

This PEP includes several new APIs that intend to fix all of the issues stated
above.

Bikeshedding and the ``PyThreadState`` namespace
------------------------------------------------

To solve the issue with "GIL" terminology, the new functions intended as
replacements for ``PyGILState`` will go under the existing ``PyThreadState``
namespace. In Python 3.14, the documentation has been

> `updated <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/127990>`_ to switch over to

Reviewer: Link to the documentation with a cross-refernce role, the PR is not relevant here.

Author: I decided to just remove the hyperlink. I'm not too sure what should be linked for the documentation.

terms using "thread state" instead of "global interpreter lock" or "GIL," so
this namespace seems to fit well for the functions in this PEP.

Full deprecation of ``PyGILState``
----------------------------------

> As made clear in the motivation, ``PyGILState`` is already pretty buggy, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As made clear in Motivation_, ``PyGILState`` is already pretty buggy, and
```

    simply mark the existing thread state as non-daemon and return. It will
    be restored to its prior daemon status upon the next
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` call.

    Return zero on success, and non-zero with the old `attached thread state`_
    restored (which may have been ``NULL``).

.. c:function:: void PyThreadState_Release()

    Detach and destroy the `attached thread state`_ set by
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`.

    This function cannot fail, but may hang the thread if the
    `attached thread state`_ prior to the original :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`
    was daemon.

Deprecation of ``PyGILState``
-----------------------------

This PEP deprecates all of the existing ``PyGILState`` APIs in favor of the
new ``PyThreadState`` APIs for the reasons given in the motivation. Namely:

- :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_GetThisThreadState`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Get` or
  :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetUnchecked` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Check`: use ``PyThreadState_GetUnchecked() != NULL``
  instead.

> All of the ``PyGILState`` APIs are to be removed from the non-limited C API in
> Python 3.25. They will remain available in the stable API for compatibility.

Reviewer: I assume you mean stable A***B***I vs limited A***P***I here? Will the functions just error in the ABI?
```suggestion
All of the ``PyGILState`` APIs are to be removed from the non-limited C API in
Python 3.25. They will remain available in the stable ABI for compatibility.
```

Author: Yup, good catch.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This PEP specifies a breaking change with the removal of all the
``PyGILState`` APIs from the public headers of the non-limited C API in 10
years (Python 3.25).

How to Teach This
=================

As with all C API functions, all the new APIs in this PEP will be documented
in the C API documentation, ideally under the

> `Non-Python created threads <https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/init.html#non-python-created-threads>`_

Reviewer: Use a cross-reference role

Author: Ditto.

Reviewer: The context has been lost here, sorry, what was the 'ditto' referring to?

Author: I didn't know how to refer to Python's documentation with Sphinx.

            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyThreadState_Release();
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    my_method(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        PyInterpreterState *interp = PyInterpreterState_Hold();
        if (PyThread_start_joinable_thread(thread_func, interp, &ident, &handle) < 0) {
            return NULL;
        }
        Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS
        PyThread_join_thread(handle);
        Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

Reference Implementation
========================

TBD.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Using an interpreter ID instead of a interpreter state
------------------------------------------------------

Some iterations of this API took an ``int64_t interp_id`` parameter instead of
``PyInterpreterState *interp``, because interpreter IDs cannot be concurrently
deleted and cause use-after-free violations. However,
:c:type:`PyInterpreterState` pointers are a lot simpler to use, and
:c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Hold` prevents the interpreter from finalizing
until :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` is called anyway.

> .. _Activate Deactivate Instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _pep-788-activate-deactivate-instead:
```

Author: Applied locally because I needed to update the reference.

Exposing an ``Activate``/``Deactivate`` API instead of ``Ensure``/``Clear``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In prior discussions of this API, it was
`suggested <https://discuss.python.org/t/a-new-api-for-ensuring-releasing-thread-states/83959/2>`_
to provide actual :c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers in the API in an attempt to
make the ownership and lifetime of the thread state clearer:

    More importantly though, I think this makes it clearer who owns the thread
    state - a manually created one is controlled by the code that created it,
    and once it's deleted it can't be activated again.

This was ultimately rejected for two reasons:

1. The proposed API has closer usage to
   :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` / :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`, which helps
   ease the transition for old codebases.

> 2. It's `significantly easier <https://discuss.python.org/t/a-new-api-for-ensuring-releasing-thread-states/83959/15>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. It's `significantly easier <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/15>`_
```

   for code-generators like Cython to use, as there isn't any additional
   complexity with tracking :c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers around.

Open Issues
===========

Use ``PyStatus`` for the return value of ``PyThreadState_Ensure``?
------------------------------------------------------------------

:c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` returns an integer to return failures, but some
iterations have suggested the use of :c:type:`PyStatus` to denote failure,
which has the benefit of providing an error message. The main hesitation for
switching to ``PyStatus`` is that it's more difficult to use, as the
``PyStatus`` has to be stored and checked, whereas a simple integer can simply
be used inline with an ``if`` clause.

Additionally, it's

> `not clear <https://discuss.python.org/t/a-new-api-for-ensuring-releasing-thread-states/83959/7>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`not clear <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/7>`_
```

Native threads will always hang during finalization
---------------------------------------------------

Many codebases might need to call Python code in highly-asynchronous
situations where the interpreter is already finalizing, or might finalize, and
want to continue running code after the Python call. This desire has been
`brought up by users <https://discuss.python.org/t/78850/>`_.
For example, a callback that wants to call Python code might be invoked when:

- A kernel has finished running on a GPU.
- A network packet was received.
- A thread has quit, and a native library is executing static finalizers of
  thread local storage.

In the current C API, any non-Python thread (one not created via the
:mod:`threading` module) is considered to be "daemon," meaning that the interpreter
won't wait on that thread to finalize. Instead, the interpreter will hang the
thread when it goes to :term:`attach <attached thread state>` a :term:`thread state`,
making it unusable past that point. Attaching a thread state can happen at
any point when invoking Python, such as releasing the GIL in-between bytecode
instructions, or when a C function exits a :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`
block.

> 

Reviewer 2: You may add a short note to document the historical behavior. Over 34 years, hanging threads was only done on the last year. Some people may not be aware of the new behavior.

    proceed. The API was designed as "it'll block and only return once it has
    the GIL" without any other option.

The existing APIs are broken and misleading
-------------------------------------------

There are currently two public ways for a user to create and attach their own
:term:`thread state`; manual use of :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` / :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap`,
and :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`. The former, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`,
is `significantly more common <https://grep.app/search?q=pygilstate_ensure>`_.

:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` generally crashes during finalization
*****************************************************************

As of this PEP, the current behavior of :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` does not
match the documentation. Instead of hanging the thread during finalization
as previously noted, it's extremely common for it to crash with a segmentation
fault. This is a `known issue <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124619>`_
that could, in theory, be fixed in CPython, but it's definitely worth noting
here. Incidentally, acceptance and implementation of this PEP will likely fix
the existing crashes caused by :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

> "GIL" is tricky for free-threading

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Term "GIL" is tricky for free-threading
```

Specification
=============

Interpreter reference counting
------------------------------

Internally, the interpreter will have to keep track of a reference count
field, which will determine when the interpreter state is actually
deallocated. This is done to prevent use-after-free crashes in
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` for interpreters with short lifetimes.

An interpreter state returned by :c:func:`Py_NewInterpreter` (or really,
:c:func:`PyInterpreterState_New`) will start with a reference count of 1, and
:c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Delete` will decrement the reference count. If the
new reference count is zero, :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Delete` will
deallocate the interpreter state. However, the reference count will *not*
prevent the interpreter from finalizing.

.. c:function:: PyInterpreterState *PyInterpreterState_Hold(void)

    Similar to :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Get`, but returns a strong
    reference to the interpreter (meaning, it has its reference count
    incremented by one, allowing the returned interpreter state to be safely
    accessed by another thread).

    This function is generally meant to be used in tandem with
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`.

>     The caller must have an :term:`attached thread state`, and cannot return a
>     failure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The caller must have an :term:`attached thread state`.
```

You may add:

"The function cannot return NULL."
or
"The function cannot fail."

.. c:function:: void PyInterpreterState_Release(PyInterpreterState *interp)

>     Decrement the reference count of the interpreter. This function mainly
>     exists for completeness, and should rarely be used; nearly all references
>     returned by :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Hold` should be released by
>     :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that it's the second sentence is useful:

```suggestion
    Decrement the reference count of the interpreter.
```

Or you may document that this function can be called when PyInterpreterState_Hold() was called but PyThreadState_Ensure() cannot be called. I don't know how to explain that simply :-)

Daemon and non-daemon threads
-----------------------------

This PEP introduces the concept of non-daemon thread states. By default, all
threads created without the :mod:`threading` module will hang when trying to
attach a thread state for a finalizing interpreter (in fact, daemon threads
that *are* created with the :mod:`threading` module will hang in the same
way). This generally happens when a thread calls :c:func:`PyEval_RestoreThread`
or in between bytecode instructions, based on :func:`sys.setswitchinterval`.

A new, internal field will be added to the ``PyThreadState`` structure that
determines if the thread is daemon. If the thread is daemon, then it will
hang during attachment as usual, but if it's not, then the interpreter will
let the thread attach and continue execution. On with-GIL builds, this again
means handing off the GIL to the thread. During finalization, the interpreter
will wait until all non-daemon threads call :c:func:`PyThreadState_Delete`.

For backwards compatibility, all thread states created by existing APIs will
remain daemon by default.

.. c:function:: int PyThreadState_SetDaemon(int is_daemon)

>     Set the :term:`attached thread state` as non-daemon or daemon. The attached

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Set the daemon status of the :term:`attached thread state`. The attached
```

>     thread state must not be the main thread for the interpreter. All thread

Reviewer 2: It's not possible to call SetDaemon(0) on the main thread state?

Author: The main thread isn't really daemon or non-daemon. I don't think we should support `SetDaemon` on the main thread.

>     states created without :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` are daemon by

Reviewer 2: I would put "All thread states ..." on a new paragraph.

    default.

    If the thread state is non-daemon, then the current interpreter will wait
    for this thread to finish before shutting down. See also
    :attr:`threading.Thread.daemon`.

    Return zero on success, non-zero *without* an exception set on failure.
    Failure generally means that threads have already finalized for the
    current interpreter.

Ensuring and releasing thread states
------------------------------------

This proposal includes two new high-level threading APIs that intend to
replace :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` and :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`.

.. c:function:: int PyThreadState_Ensure(PyInterpreterState *interp)

    Ensure that the thread has an :term:`attached thread state` for *interp*, and
    thus can safely invoke that interpreter. It is OK to call this function if
    the thread already has an attached thread state, as long as there is a
    subsequent call to :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` that matches this one.

>     This function always steals a reference to *interp*; as in, the
>     interpreter's reference count is decremented by one. As such, *interp*

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to avoid "steal" term here:

```suggestion
    The interpreter's *interp* reference count is decremented by one. As such, *interp*
```

    should have been acquired by :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Hold`.

    Thread states created by this function are non-daemon by default. See
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_SetDaemon`. If the calling thread already has an
    :term:`attached thread state` that matches *interp*, then this function will
    simply mark the existing thread state as non-daemon and return. It will
    be restored to its prior daemon status upon the next
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` call.

    Return zero on success, and non-zero with the old :term:`attached thread state`
    restored (which may have been ``NULL``).

.. c:function:: void PyThreadState_Release()

    Detach and destroy the :term:`attached thread state` set by
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`.

    This function cannot fail, but may hang the thread if the
    :term:`attached thread state` prior to the original :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`

>     was daemon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    was daemon and the interpreter was finalized.
```

Deprecation of ``PyGILState`` APIs
----------------------------------

This PEP deprecates all of the existing ``PyGILState`` APIs in favor of the
new ``PyThreadState`` APIs for the reasons given in the motivation. Namely:

- :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_GetThisThreadState`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Get` or
  :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetUnchecked` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Check`: use ``PyThreadState_GetUnchecked() != NULL``
  instead.

> All of the ``PyGILState`` APIs are to be removed from the non-limited C API in
> Python 3.25. They will remain available in the stable ABI for compatibility.
> 

Reviewer 2: I don't think that it's needed to schedule the removal right now. We can just deprecate the API and decide later when to remove, depending on the adopting of the new API.

It might be acceptable to keep these APIs forever. They have to stay in the stable ABI for example.

```suggestion
```

Author: I'd personally like to keep this as an open issue for now. We'll (hopefully) get a good idea of what the migration will be like on DPO.

            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyGILState_Release(gstate);
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    my_method(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        if (PyThread_start_joinable_thread(thread_func, NULL, &ident, &handle) < 0) {
            return NULL;
        }
        Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS;
        PyThread_join_thread(handle);
        Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS;
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

This is the same code, updated to use the new functions:

.. code-block:: C

    static int
    thread_func(void *arg)
    {
        PyInterpreterState *interp = (PyInterpreterState *)arg;
        if (PyThreadState_Ensure(interp) < 0) {
            fputs("Cannot talk to Python", stderr);
            return -1;
        }
        if (PyRun_SimpleString("print(42)") < 0) {
            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyThreadState_Release();
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    my_method(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        PyInterpreterState *interp = PyInterpreterState_Hold();

>         if (PyThread_start_joinable_thread(thread_func, interp, &ident, &handle) < 0) {

Reviewer 2: You should call `PyInterpreterState_Release(interp)` on error.

TBD.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Using an interpreter ID instead of a interpreter state
------------------------------------------------------

Some iterations of this API took an ``int64_t interp_id`` parameter instead of
``PyInterpreterState *interp``, because interpreter IDs cannot be concurrently
deleted and cause use-after-free violations. :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Hold`
fixes this issue anyway, but an interpreter ID does have the benefit of
requiring less magic in the implementation, but has several downsides:

1. Nearly all existing APIs already return a :c:type:`PyInterpreterState`
   pointer, not an interpreter ID. Functions like
   :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetInterpreter` would have to be accompanied by
   frustrating calls to :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_GetID`. There's also
   no existing way to go from an ``int64_t`` back to a
   :c:expr:`PyInterpreterState *`, and providing such an API would come
   with its own set of design problems.
2. Threads typically take a ``void *arg`` parameter, not an ``int64_t arg``.
   As such, passing an interpreter pointer requires much less boilerplate
   for the user, because an additional structure definition or heap allocation

>    would be needed to store the interpreter ID.

Reviewer 2: Especially on 32-bit systems where `void*` is only 32-bit.

   a reference count.

.. _pep-788-activate-deactivate-instead:

Exposing an ``Activate``/``Deactivate`` API instead of ``Ensure``/``Clear``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In prior discussions of this API, it was
`suggested <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/2>`_ to provide actual
:c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers in the API in an attempt to
make the ownership and lifetime of the thread state clearer:

    More importantly though, I think this makes it clearer who owns the thread
    state - a manually created one is controlled by the code that created it,
    and once it's deleted it can't be activated again.

This was ultimately rejected for two reasons:

1. The proposed API has closer usage to
   :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` / :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`, which helps
   ease the transition for old codebases.
2. It's `significantly easier <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/15>`_
   for code-generators like Cython to use, as there isn't any additional
   complexity with tracking :c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers around.

Open Issues
===========

Use ``PyStatus`` for the return value of :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`?

> ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer 2: I suggest to use an integer and give up on PyStatus and error messages.

:c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` returns an integer to return failures, but some
iterations have suggested the use of :c:type:`PyStatus` to denote failure,
which has the benefit of providing an error message. The main hesitation for
switching to ``PyStatus`` is that it's more difficult to use, as the
``PyStatus`` has to be stored and checked, whereas a simple integer can simply
be used inline with an ``if`` clause.

Additionally, it's
`not clear <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/7>`_
that an error message would be all that useful; all the conceived use-cases
for this API wouldn't really care about a message indicating why Python can't
be invoked.

When should the legacy APIs be removed?

> ---------------------------------------

Author: See my other comment. If we remove it from the specification, we should definitely keep it as an open issue for now.

PEP: 788
Title: Reimagining native threads
Author: Peter Bierma <zintensitydev@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 23-Apr-2025
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History: `10-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959>`__

Abstract
========

:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`, and other related
functions in the ``PyGILState`` family are the most common way to create
native threads that interact with Python. They have been the standard for over
twenty years (:pep:`311`). But, over time, these functions have
become problematic:

- They aren't safe for finalization, either causing the calling thread to hang or
  crashing it with a segmentation fault, preventing further execution.
- When they're called before finalization, they force the thread to be
  "daemon", meaning that the interpreter won't wait for it to reach any point
  of execution. This is mostly frustrating for developers, but can lead to
  deadlocks!
- Subinterpreters don't play nicely with them, because they all assume that

>   the main interpreter is the only one that exists. A fresh thread (*i.e.*,

Reviewer 4: Avoid Latin abbreviations: https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#use-simple-language
```suggestion
  the main interpreter is the only one that exists. A fresh thread (that is,
```

  has never had a thread state) that calls :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` will
  always be for the main interpreter.
- The term "GIL" in the name is quite confusing for users of free-threaded
  Python. There isn't a GIL, why do they still have to call it?

This PEP intends to fix all of these issues by providing two new functions,
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` and :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release`, as a more
correct and safer replacement for :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` and
:c:func:`PyGILState_Release`. For example:

> .. code-block:: C

Reviewer 4: Usually lower case is used:
```suggestion
.. code-block:: c
```
Or we can put `.. highlight:: c` near the top to set the default, and remove these, and change `For example:` to `For example::`

In the current C API, any non-Python thread (one not created via the
:mod:`threading` module) is considered to be "daemon", meaning that the interpreter
won't wait on that thread to finalize. Instead, the interpreter will hang the
thread when it goes to :term:`attach <attached thread state>` a :term:`thread state`,
making it unusable past that point. Attaching a thread state can happen at
any point when invoking Python, such as releasing the GIL in-between bytecode
instructions, or when a C function exits a :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`
block.

This means that any non-Python thread may be terminated at any point, which
is severely limiting for users who want to do more than just execute Python
code in their stream of calls (for example, C++ executing finalizers in
*addition* to calling Python).

Using :c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing` is insufficient
***********************************************

The :c:func:`docs <PyGILState_Ensure>`
currently recommend :c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing` to guard against termination of
the thread:

    Calling this function from a thread when the runtime is finalizing will
    terminate the thread, even if the thread was not created by Python. You

>     can use Py_IsFinalizing() or sys.is_finalizing() to check if the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    can use ``Py_IsFinalizing()`` or ``sys.is_finalizing()`` to check if the
```

    interpreter is in process of being finalized before calling this function
    to avoid unwanted termination.

Unfortunately, this isn't correct, because of time-of-call to time-of-use
issues; the interpreter might not be finalizing during the call to
:c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing`, but it might start finalizing right after, which
would cause the attachment of a thread state (typically via
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`) to hang the thread.

Daemon threads can cause finalization deadlocks
***********************************************

When acquiring locks, it's extremely important to detach the thread state to
prevent deadlocks. This is true on both the with-GIL and free-threaded builds.
When the GIL is enabled, a deadlock can occur pretty easily when acquiring a
lock if the GIL wasn't released, and lock-ordering deadlocks can still occur
free-threaded builds if the thread state wasn't detached.

So, all code that needs to work with locks need to detach the thread state.
In C, this is almost always done via :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS` and
:c:macro:`Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS`, in a code block that looks something like this:

> .. code-block:: C

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: c
```

    Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS
    acquire_lock();
    Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS

Again, in a daemon thread, :c:macro:`Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS` will hang the thread
if the interpreter is finalizing. But, :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS` will
*not* hang the thread; the lock will be acquired, and *then* hung! Once that
happens, nothing can try to acquire that lock without deadlocking. The main
thread will continue to run finalizers past that point, though. If any of
those finalizers try to acquire the lock, deadlock ensues.

This affects the Python core itself, and there's not much that can be done

> to fix it. For example, `gh-129536 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/129536>`_

Reviewer 4: We use this format in a couple of places below. Either use that one here:
```suggestion
to fix it. For example, `python/cpython#129536 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/129536>`_
```
Or update those to use this format.

Python 3.25. They will remain available in the stable ABI for compatibility.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This PEP specifies a breaking change with the removal of all the
``PyGILState`` APIs from the public headers of the non-limited C API in 10
years (Python 3.25).

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP has no known security implications.

How to Teach This
=================

As with all C API functions, all the new APIs in this PEP will be documented
in the C API documentation, ideally under the :ref:`python:gilstate` section.
The existing ``PyGILState`` documentation should be updated accordingly to point
to the new APIs.

Examples
--------

These examples are here to help understand the APIs described in this PEP.
Ideally, they could be reused in the documentation.

Single-threaded example
***********************

This example shows acquiring a lock in a Python method.

If this were to be called from a daemon thread, then the interpreter could
hang the thread while reattaching the thread state, leaving us with the lock
held. Any future finalizer that wanted to acquire the lock would be deadlocked!

> .. code-block:: C

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: c
```

    static PyObject *
    my_critical_operation(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        assert(PyThreadState_GetUnchecked() != NULL);
        PyInterpreterState *interp = PyInterpreterState_Hold();
        /* Temporarily make this thread non-daemon to ensure that the
           lock is released. */
        if (PyThreadState_Ensure(interp) < 0) {
            PyErr_SetString(PyExc_PythonFinalizationError,
                            "interpreter is shutting down");
            return NULL;
        }

        Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS;
        acquire_some_lock();
        Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS;

        /* Do something while holding the lock */
        // ...

        release_some_lock();
        PyThreadState_Release();
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

Transitioning from old functions
********************************

The following code uses the old ``PyGILState`` APIs:

> .. code-block:: C

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: c
```

    static int
    thread_func(void *arg)
    {
        PyGILState_STATE gstate = PyGILState_Ensure();
        /* It's not an issue in this example, but we just attached
           a thread state for the main interpreter. If my_method() was
           originally called in a subinterpreter, then we would be unable
           to safely interact with any objects from it. */
        if (PyRun_SimpleString("print(42)") < 0) {
            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyGILState_Release(gstate);
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    my_method(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        if (PyThread_start_joinable_thread(thread_func, NULL, &ident, &handle) < 0) {
            return NULL;
        }
        Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS;
        PyThread_join_thread(handle);
        Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS;
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

This is the same code, updated to use the new functions:

> .. code-block:: C

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: c
```

    my_method(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        PyInterpreterState *interp = PyInterpreterState_Hold();
        if (PyThread_start_joinable_thread(thread_func, interp, &ident, &handle) < 0) {
            PyInterpreterState_Release(interp);
            return NULL;
        }
        Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS
        PyThread_join_thread(handle);
        Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation of this PEP can be found
`here <https://github.com/ZeroIntensity/cpython/tree/pep-788-impl>`_.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Using an interpreter ID instead of a interpreter state
------------------------------------------------------

Some iterations of this API took an ``int64_t interp_id`` parameter instead of
``PyInterpreterState *interp``, because interpreter IDs cannot be concurrently
deleted and cause use-after-free violations. :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Hold`
fixes this issue anyway, but an interpreter ID does have the benefit of
requiring less magic in the implementation, but has several downsides:

> 1. Nearly all existing APIs already return a :c:type:`PyInterpreterState`

Reviewer 4: Use bullet points if the order is not important.

https://asrfs.github.io/Tech-Writing-for-Techies/output/html/02-03-lists-instructions.html#_bullet_or_numbered

   reference count, otherwise the interpreter could be finalizing before
   the native thread gets a chance to attach. The problem with using an
   interpreter ID is that the reference count has to be "invisible"; it
   must be tracked elsewhere in the interpreter, likely being *more*
   complex than :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_Hold`. There's also a lack
   of intuition that a standalone integer could have such a thing as
   a reference count.

.. _pep-788-activate-deactivate-instead:

Exposing an ``Activate``/``Deactivate`` API instead of ``Ensure``/``Clear``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In prior discussions of this API, it was
`suggested <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/2>`_ to provide actual
:c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers in the API in an attempt to
make the ownership and lifetime of the thread state clearer:

    More importantly though, I think this makes it clearer who owns the thread
    state - a manually created one is controlled by the code that created it,
    and once it's deleted it can't be activated again.

This was ultimately rejected for two reasons:

> 1. The proposed API has closer usage to

Reviewer 4: Likewise bullets if order not important.

- A network packet was received.
- A thread has quit, and a native library is executing static finalizers of
  thread local storage.

In the current C API, any non-Python thread (one not created via the
:mod:`threading` module) is considered to be "daemon", meaning that the interpreter
won't wait on that thread to finalize. Instead, the interpreter will hang the
thread when it goes to :term:`attach <attached thread state>` a :term:`thread state`,
making it unusable past that point. Attaching a thread state can happen at
any point when invoking Python, such as releasing the GIL in-between bytecode
instructions, or when a C function exits a :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`
block. (Note that hanging the thread is relatively new behavior; in prior
versions, the thread would terminate, but the issue is the same.)

This means that any non-Python thread may be terminated at any point, which
is severely limiting for users who want to do more than just execute Python
code in their stream of calls (for example, C++ executing finalizers in
*addition* to calling Python).

Using :c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing` is insufficient
***********************************************

> The :c:func:`docs <PyGILState_Ensure>`

Reviewer: This doesn't look great when rendered (as code rather than a link).

currently recommend :c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing` to guard against termination of
the thread:

    Calling this function from a thread when the runtime is finalizing will
    terminate the thread, even if the thread was not created by Python. You
    can use ``Py_IsFinalizing()`` or ``sys.is_finalizing()`` to check if the
    interpreter is in process of being finalized before calling this function
    to avoid unwanted termination.

Unfortunately, this isn't correct, because of time-of-call to time-of-use
issues; the interpreter might not be finalizing during the call to

> :c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing`, but it might start finalizing right after, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing`, but it might start finalizing immediately afterwards, which
```

would cause the attachment of a thread state (typically via
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`) to hang the thread.

Daemon threads can cause finalization deadlocks
***********************************************

When acquiring locks, it's extremely important to detach the thread state to
prevent deadlocks. This is true on both the with-GIL and free-threaded builds.
When the GIL is enabled, a deadlock can occur pretty easily when acquiring a
lock if the GIL wasn't released, and lock-ordering deadlocks can still occur
free-threaded builds if the thread state wasn't detached.

So, all code that needs to work with locks need to detach the thread state.
In C, this is almost always done via :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS` and
:c:macro:`Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS`, in a code block that looks something like this:

.. code-block:: c

    Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS
    acquire_lock();
    Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS

Again, in a daemon thread, :c:macro:`Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS` will hang the thread
if the interpreter is finalizing. But, :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS` will

> *not* hang the thread; the lock will be acquired, and *then* hung! Once that

Reviewer: I think the phrasing could be clearer here (specifically, the sentence reads as that the lock hangs, but I don't think that's what you mean). 

I'm also not particularly keen on 'hang' as a verb here, but it might be more common as a term of art. (I would phrase it as 'X will not cause the thread to hang' rather than 'X will not hang the thread')

Author: "Hang" is a term of art here, yeah. Specifically, it's in reference to `PyThread_hang_thread`.

> *not* hang the thread; the lock will be acquired, and *then* hung! Once that

Reviewer: I think the phrasing could be clearer here (specifically, the sentence reads as that the lock hangs, but I don't think that's what you mean). 

I'm also not particularly keen on 'hang' as a verb (throughout), but it might be more common as a term of art. (I would phrase it as 'X will not cause the thread to hang' rather than 'X will not hang the thread'.)

happens, nothing can try to acquire that lock without deadlocking. The main
thread will continue to run finalizers past that point, though. If any of
those finalizers try to acquire the lock, deadlock ensues.

> This affects the Python core itself, and there's not much that can be done

Reviewer: Could we be specific? CPython, or the interpreter, or {blah}: the 'Python core' is vague.

*********************************************************************

There will always have to be a point in a Python program where
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` can no longer acquire the GIL (or more correctly,
attach a thread state). If the interpreter is long dead, then Python
obviously can't give a thread a way to invoke it.
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` doesn't have any meaningful way to return a
failure, so it has no choice but to terminate the thread or emit a fatal
error, as noted in `python/cpython#124622 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124622>`_:

    I think a new GIL acquisition and release C API would be needed. The way
    the existing ones get used in existing C code is not amenible to suddenly
    bolting an error state onto; none of the existing C code is written that
    way. After the call they always just assume they have the GIL and can
    proceed. The API was designed as "it'll block and only return once it has
    the GIL" without any other option.

The existing APIs are broken and misleading
-------------------------------------------

There are currently two public ways for a user to create and attach their own

> :term:`thread state`; manual use of :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` / :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:term:`thread state`; manual use of :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` & :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap`,
```

> and :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`. The former, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`. The latter, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`,
```

Author: Oops.

is `significantly more common <https://grep.app/search?q=pygilstate_ensure>`_.

:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` generally crashes during finalization
*****************************************************************

> As of this PEP, the current behavior of :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing, the current behavior of :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` does not
```

match the documentation. Instead of hanging the thread during finalization
as previously noted, it's extremely common for it to crash with a segmentation
fault. This is a `known issue <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124619>`_
that could, in theory, be fixed in CPython, but it's definitely worth noting
here. Incidentally, acceptance and implementation of this PEP will likely fix
the existing crashes caused by :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

The term "GIL" is tricky for free-threading
*******************************************

A large issue with the term "GIL" in the C API is that it's semantically
misleading, as noted in `python/cpython#127989
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/127989>`_,
created by the authors of this PEP:

    The biggest issue is that for free-threading, there is no GIL, so users
    erroneously call the C API inside ``Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`` blocks or
    omit ``PyGILState_Ensure`` in fresh threads.

In reality, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` doesn't just "acquire the GIL" in

> modern versions. It attaches a :term:`thread state` for the current

Reviewer: When did this change? Can we avoid saying 'modern versions' and be specific? 

If it was ages ago (pre 3.9), you could just say all currently supported versions or etc.

Author: It's somewhat recent. This was new in 3.12 with the per-interpreter GIL.

Reviewer: I would definitely rephrase then, 3.12 is very recent on typical downstream support lifespans.

Author: I just added a note saying "that being since 3.12." Is that fine?

Reviewer: Having looked at this section again, I would propose rewording as follows:

"A large issue with the term “GIL” in the C API is that it is semantically misleading. Since Python 3.12, calling PyGILState_Ensure() attaches a thread state for the current thread. It is no longer accurate to describe the function as just 'acquire the GIL'. Keeping the current name is thus unhelpful and confusing. This has been seen for example in {issue number} ...: {block quote}

In current versions, it is the attached thread state that lets a thread invoke the C API. On with-GIL ..."

To my eye this is clearer, and better introduces the main concerns: (a) the function's name no longer accurately describes what it does and (b) this leads to user confusion, as they believe they can omit anything with 'GIL' on a free threaded build.

Reviewer: Having looked at this section again, I would propose rewording as follows:

"A large issue with the term “GIL” in the C API is that it is semantically misleading. Since Python 3.12, calling PyGILState_Ensure() attaches a thread state for the current thread. It is no longer accurate to describe the function as just 'acquire the GIL'. Keeping the current name is thus unhelpful and confusing. This has been seen for example in {issue number} ...: {block quote}

In current versions, it is the attached thread state that lets a thread invoke the C API. On with-GIL ..."

To my eye this is clearer, and better introduces the main concerns: (a) the function's name no longer accurately describes what it does and (b) this leads to user confusion, as they believe they can omit anything with 'GIL' on a free threaded build.

Author: I'll reword it, but it's a little misleading/incorrect, primarily this part: "Since Python 3.12, calling :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` attaches a thread state for the current thread. It is no longer accurate to describe the
function as just "acquire the GIL"."

`PyGILState_Ensure` has always set up a thread state, but the important change in 3.12 was that thread-states were made thread-local, and thus a non-NULL thread state would imply holding the GIL.

Reviewer: Thanks, I expected that I would get something wrong!

above.

Replacing the old APIs
----------------------

As made clear in Motivation_, ``PyGILState`` is already pretty buggy, and
even if it was magically fixed, the current behavior of hanging the thread is
beyond repair. In turn, this PEP intends to completely deprecate the existing
``PyGILState`` APIs and provide better alternatives. However, even if this PEP
is rejected, all of the APIs can be replaced with more correct ``PyThreadState``
functions in the current C API:

- :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`: :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap` / :c:func:`PyThreadState_New`
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`: :c:func:`PyThreadState_Clear` / :c:func:`PyThreadState_Delete`
- :c:func:`PyGILState_GetThisThreadState`: :c:func:`PyThreadState_Get`
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Check`: ``PyThreadState_GetUnchecked() != NULL``

A light layer of magic
----------------------

The APIs proposed by this PEP intentionally have a layer of abstraction that is
hidden from the user and offloads complexity onto CPython. This is done
primarily to help ease the transition from ``PyGILState`` for existing
codebases, and for ease-of-use to those who provide wrappers the C API, such

> as Cython or PyO3. See also :ref:`pep-788-activate-deactivate-instead`.

Reviewer: This section says there is some mysterious abstraction, but it isn't clear what that is. Is it relevant to the reader to know this? If so, could you rephrase or add more context please?

    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` call.

    Return zero on success, and non-zero with the old :term:`attached thread state`
    restored (which may have been ``NULL``).

.. c:function:: void PyThreadState_Release()

    Detach and destroy the :term:`attached thread state` set by
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`.

    This function cannot fail, but may hang the thread if the
    :term:`attached thread state` prior to the original :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`
    was daemon and the interpreter was finalized.

Deprecation of ``PyGILState`` APIs
----------------------------------

This PEP deprecates all of the existing ``PyGILState`` APIs in favor of the
new ``PyThreadState`` APIs for the reasons given in the motivation. Namely:

- :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_GetThisThreadState`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Get` or
  :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetUnchecked` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Check`: use ``PyThreadState_GetUnchecked() != NULL``
  instead.

All of the ``PyGILState`` APIs are to be removed from the non-limited C API in

> Python 3.25. They will remain available in the stable ABI for compatibility.

Reviewer: Is there comment on why such a long period was chosen?

Author: No, I should probably put that in the rationale.

PEP: 788
Title: Reimagining native threads
Author: Peter Bierma <zintensitydev@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 23-Apr-2025
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History: `10-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959>`__

Abstract
========

> :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`, and other related

Author: Oops, yeah.

functions in the ``PyGILState`` family are the most common way to create
native threads that interact with Python. They have been the standard for over
twenty years (:pep:`311`). But, over time, these functions have
become problematic:

- They aren't safe for finalization, either causing the calling thread to hang or
  crashing it with a segmentation fault, preventing further execution.
- When they're called before finalization, they force the thread to be
  "daemon", meaning that the interpreter won't wait for it to reach any point
  of execution. This is mostly frustrating for developers, but can lead to
  deadlocks!
- Subinterpreters don't play nicely with them, because they all assume that
  the main interpreter is the only one that exists. A fresh thread (that is,

>   has never had a thread state) that calls :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` will

Author: These render the same though, right? It might be nice to keep it clickable.

>   has never had a thread state) that calls :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` will

Reviewer 4: Yes, they render the same, except the `!` one is not a link.

The [devguide](https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#links) says:

> Links are a powerful tool for helping people navigate documentation and find more information, but links can be over-used. Links should be used only if they help the reader.
> 
> Generally, a link should be provided for the first use of a term in a unit, such as a section or paragraph. This is not a hard and fast rule. Sometimes the second mention is more appropriate for a link. Some units are long enough to have a few repeated links. Use judgement to decide when a link will help the reader.

I'll leave it up to you :)

Let me know if you're ready to merge as-is.

>   has never had a thread state) that calls :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` will

Author: I'd like to leave these links. They don't render any differently, so if I were a reader and wanted to learn more about one of the functions, it would be frustrating to try to find the one that's actually a link.

> Let me know if you're ready to merge as-is.

All ready here :)

obviously can't give a thread a way to invoke it.
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` doesn't have any meaningful way to return a
failure, so it has no choice but to terminate the thread or emit a fatal
error, as noted in `python/cpython#124622 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124622>`_:

    I think a new GIL acquisition and release C API would be needed. The way
    the existing ones get used in existing C code is not amenible to suddenly
    bolting an error state onto; none of the existing C code is written that
    way. After the call they always just assume they have the GIL and can
    proceed. The API was designed as "it'll block and only return once it has
    the GIL" without any other option.

The existing APIs are broken and misleading
-------------------------------------------

There are currently two public ways for a user to create and attach their own
:term:`thread state`; manual use of :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` & :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap`,
and :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`. The latter, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`,
is `significantly more common <https://grep.app/search?q=pygilstate_ensure>`_.

> :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` generally crashes during finalization
> *****************************************************************

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
``PyGILState_Ensure`` generally crashes during finalization
***********************************************************
```

here. Incidentally, acceptance and implementation of this PEP will likely fix
the existing crashes caused by :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

The term "GIL" is tricky for free-threading
*******************************************

A large issue with the term "GIL" in the C API is that it is semantically
misleading. This was noted in `python/cpython#127989
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/127989>`_,
created by the authors of this PEP:

    The biggest issue is that for free-threading, there is no GIL, so users
    erroneously call the C API inside ``Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`` blocks or
    omit ``PyGILState_Ensure`` in fresh threads.

Since Python 3.12, it is an :term:`attached thread state` that lets a thread
invoke the C API. On with-GIL builds, holding an :term:`attached thread state`
implies holding the GIL, so only one thread can have one at a time. Free-threaded
builds achieve the effect of multi-core parallism while remaining
ackwards-compatible by simply removing that limitation: threads still need a
thread state (and thus need to call :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`), but they
don't need to wait on one another to do so.

> Subinterpreters don't work with :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`
> -----------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Subinterpreters don't work with ``PyGILState_Ensure``
-----------------------------------------------------
```

        PyMem_RawFree(data);
        if (interp == NULL) {
            fputs("Python has shut down", stderr);
            return -1;
        }
        if (PyThreadState_Ensure(interp) < 0) {
            fputs("Cannot talk to Python", stderr);
            return -1;
        }
        if (PyRun_SimpleString("print(42)") < 0) {
            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyThreadState_Release();
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    setup_callback(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        pyrun_t *data = PyMem_RawMalloc(sizeof(pyrun_t));
        if (data == NULL) {
            return PyErr_NoMemory();
        }
        // Weak reference to the interpreter. It won't wait on the callback
        // to finalize.
        data->interp_id = PyInterpreterState_GetID(PyInterpreterState_Get());
        register_callback(async_callback, data);

        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation of this PEP can be found
`here <https://github.com/ZeroIntensity/cpython/tree/pep-788-impl>`_.

Rejected Ideas
==============

> Using an interpreter ID instead of a interpreter state for :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`
> -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using an interpreter ID instead of a interpreter state for ``PyThreadState_Ensure``
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

   problem because the reference count is always associated with the returned
   interpreter state, not the integer ID.

.. _pep-788-activate-deactivate-instead:

Exposing an ``Activate``/``Deactivate`` API instead of ``Ensure``/``Clear``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In prior discussions of this API, it was
`suggested <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/2>`_ to provide actual
:c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers in the API in an attempt to
make the ownership and lifetime of the thread state clearer:

    More importantly though, I think this makes it clearer who owns the thread
    state - a manually created one is controlled by the code that created it,
    and once it's deleted it can't be activated again.

This was ultimately rejected for two reasons:

-  The proposed API has closer usage to
   :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` & :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`, which helps
   ease the transition for old codebases.
-  It's `significantly easier <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/15>`_
   for code-generators like Cython to use, as there isn't any additional
   complexity with tracking :c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers around.

> Using ``PyStatus`` for the return value of :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`
> -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using ``PyStatus`` for the return value of ``PyThreadState_Ensure``
-------------------------------------------------------------------
```
